---
layout: post
title:  "On the Professionalized Discipline of Landscape Architecture"
date:   2025-01-14 4:20:00 -0800
categories: landscape-architecture
---

It cannot be denied that landscape architecture has, since its inception, lived in the shadow of, capital 'A', *Architecture*. Were they two different soda brands, architecture would be Coke--the "Real Thing". Void of any qualifying prefix, architecture is the original, the real McCoy, an elite and ancient practice amongst humanity's highest ideals. On the other hand, landscape architecture tastes more like Squirt, a peculiar flavor (sweet and sour), certainly a soda, but firmly subsidiary in consumer preference, cultural significance, and total market share. Besides its more limited preoccupation with "landscape" as its medium, it fails to stand out as a practice in its own right. By recognizing itself *within* architecture, landscape architecture admits a certain descendence from architecture, existing as a sub-field comprised of specialists, at least in name if not in practice.

Is this such a terrible predicament? After all, such specialization seems prudent if not essential to the production of space, with all its complexity demanding focused attention to sufficiently construct environments which support the "health, safety, and welfare" of the public. Why the ideological inferiority complex then? Worse still, why the bloated ego and self-image as undiscovered talent? Is this phenomenon widespread or confined to a particular professional "space" or subculture? Is it bound up merely within specific individuals or could it be said to represent a more widespread professional affect (or affliction)?

To venture a guess, I'd say it has to do with not *being* an architect first and foremost. The licensed landscape architect cannot legally perform the work of an architect, yet an architect may in some instances perform the work of a landscape architect. Despite this legalistic reality, we needn't see one discipline as requiring to have first been parsed through the other. Still, it nonetheless feels disingenuous to claim the title of Architect whilst perceiving one's profession as ontologically distinct from it. Were these disciplines equals, their nomenclature might reflect their specialization--a *building* architect versus a *landscape* architect. This, of course, seems awkward. Imagine all the manner of qualifying prefixes to distinguish architects from one another (e.g., city, public, residential, institutional). What would an architect who practices in multiple fields or specializations call themselves? Polyarchitect? 

While the history of architecture traces its origins to the *master builder* (reflecting a hierarchical relationship between *builders* in a vernacular form of spatial production and construction). In contrast, landscape architecture both shares its professional origins with architecture and, simultaneously, derives its practice from a botanical lineage whose most acute professional touchstone is the *gardener*. These histories are typically glossed over in professionalized undergraduate and graduate landscape architecture programs, favoring a preoccupation with productive practice over a critical study of the profession's ontology. The events which precede the form of contemporary practice tend to be regarded as background--a "given" past in a linear progression of history characterized by curious anecdotes which might serve as design inspiration but pose no current threat to the status quo. It is here that I take the opposite position: disciplinary ontologies are always at risk of being transformed by their pasts. This view begins to explain why a deemphasis of studies in history and theory might reflect values embodied by the prevailing social and material relations in professional practice.

In light of this, how should we interpret the meaning of landscape architecture now that it has been [designated a STEM discipline](https://www.asla.org/NewsReleaseDetails.aspx?id=63963) by none other than the Department of Homeland Security? Should we read this occasion as the disciplines's long awaited moment in the sun, as many prominent landscape architects have proudly proclaimed? To what extent is this official approval by an arm of the national security state a sign of landscape architecture's present and future ideological disposition? What will this mean for both practice and education, and to what degree will history and theory be further subsumed?

---

## Options Within the Status Quo Paradigm

Yes, the existing paradigm and culture of the landscape architectural business is bs for a number of reasons, and it is these reasons that people like you and me are either (1) driven away from the field temporarily or entirely, as was the case for me, (2) consigned to the long slog to equal recognition and representation in one's firm via partnership, which is not guaranteed, or (3) breaking away and starting one's own firm, which is where you find yourself now. 

If a capable landscape architect has any interest in staying in the field and is not especially cozy with the partners or cutthroat enough to weasel their way into a position of leadership, then they can expect to either spend years languishing in a mid-tier project management position without powerful means of negotiating their position and no guarantee of their ascension to a position of equal partnership. Even then, one typically must "buy" their share of the company, which implies they have the capital, or debt, to do so. Until then, the firm leaders can make all manner of empty promises, keeping you hanging on by a thread, chasing the carrot, until you either give up and accept your position as is without expectation of any better conditions for yourself and loved ones, or you seek work elsewhere through a lateral or vertical move. Unless that move is sufficiently to your advantage, you are liable to find yourself in yet another bullshit situation, clawing your way through mud, all the while having to convince yourself that this work is your "passion" and you aren't in it for the money, benefits, notoriety—and that might be true, but it doesn't help your material position in life, especially as inflation and cost of living rises unabated, not to mention there appears to be no end to global ecological crisis, rampant social inequality, and so on which hold little promise of a liveable future for one's children or justice for those that bear the greatest burden of the present world we occupy.

So it follows that breaking away to start one's own firm would appear romantic and exciting. We can make a clean start, bringing our idealism and autonomy to bear upon the projects we pursue and the culture of our firm. The notion of being scrappy and competitive—starting small and building up into a major challenger in the marketplace—is the entrepreneurial American dream. But with as much fetishization that emerges from start-up culture in America, the reality is that most businesses fail, and so one has to be pretty damn sure they can distinguish themselves from the crowd, stay the course and ride the period of operating in the red. Consequently, your life transforms into something where work is the purpose of life itself, and we can see how that can become all engrossing to a fault. Furthermore, whereas you have been freed from the restraints placed upon you by the old firm, the pool of clients and projects is the same, driven by the same market forces, regulations, and profit motive. If you survive, more often than not, what this once scrappy and idealistic firm becomes is a carbon copy of the same bullshit industry, replicating the problems you intended to escape and passing them on to the next generation of ambitious young talent who are then faced with the exact same conundrum you were, except now you're the asshole keeping them down. Circle of life?

Okay, so this is an admittedly bleak synopsis on the surface, but it raises the question: is there another way? My answer is, "Maybe." To figure out what it is, I think there are a few bullshit items we have to recognize and contend with whether regardless of whether we decide to stay our present courses or to venture out on our own:

- Ethics
- Contradictions at the Heart of Professional Ideology
- True Equality through Collectivism, Equal Partnership and Unionization
- Design Thinking as a Way Out and In

## The Failures of the Professionalized Discipline of Landscape Architecture

Despite the ideological indoctrination committed by the design industries, and the universities which produce their workforce, in selling the idea that landscape architects are saving the world, all evidence would suggest that a great ecological breakdown (global warming, 6th extinction, exploitation of the global south by the global north, resurgence of fascism and white nationalism) is unfolding before our eyes and that landscape architecture's attempts to prevent it (and those of the architectural disciplines in general) have proven impotent. The reasons are manifold:
- The preoccupation with the site, as the scale of professional concern for landscape architects, is incapable of incorporating the broader complexity of social, economic, and environmental systems. 
- On the flip side, systems theory is unable to account for the molecular scale of political power which often plays out like a tragic story amongst a few key actors. These actors (politicians, capitalists, etc.) do more to affect the systems than the systems do. 

What is needed is a way of conceptualizing landscape architecture, as a practice, in relation to the molar and molecular scales of global catastrophe which transcends simplistic narratives of heroic professionalism. Put simply, landscape architecture isn't imbued with godlike powers to change the world any more than any other industry. As long as the paradigm in which it operates tacitly endorses the existing power hegemony and its status quo, nothing will change. The contours of landscape architecture as a practice are graded by the backhoes and bulldozers of fossil-fuel capitalism. Its catalogs are supplied by the shipping containers of international sea trade. Its sites are the conquest of white settler colonialism. 

A break from these destructive traditions is needed to navigate us toward a future worth living for and within. It follows that the argument for a special status of designers should be abandoned and replaced by the sober admission that we are no more or less special than any other to be able to affect change, despite any peculiar or unique technical specializations we possess. Therefore we ought to look beyond the frame of professionalism to find answers, methods, and comrades in arms.

## Contradictions at the Heart of Professional Ideology

Until the field of socio-economic conditions which preclude equity for all people are addressed (cost of living, equality of pay, free education, access to means of production) there will be no fundamental change in the nature of inequality except for its further institutionalization. Attempts at reform, such as diversity and inclusion initiatives, well-intentioned and targeted in their impact, do not account for the systemic change required to not only improve but fundamentally transform the condition of marginalized peoples and the societies which marginalize them. Instead, these tactics cement the oppressive conditions of these institutions by rebranding them (as diverse, equitable, inclusive, and accessible) whilst mitigating their function as sorting device through small-scale charity dependent on donations from members of the existing ruling class. Scholarships for women and BIPOC serve to prepare marginalized peoples for work in the existing cultural hegemony of a white, male-dominant industry. This is simply capitalism (and its implicit racism, sexism, ableism, etc.) recast with a smiling face rather than a new political economy characterized by transformative equality.

On top of this, regardless of marginalization or protected status, all design workers enter the field of labor on perilous, exploitative footing. Few firms, if any, articulate concrete compensation and professional development support. In fact, you will be hard pressed to find a firm which can describe your future prospects beyond the "now"&mdash;which is constantly shifting and increasingly precarious. As such, young designers especially but really all designers and even licensed architects, are faced with a precarious life of unstable working conditions, insufficient pay (assuming a single-income household), and a culture of expectations bordering on the abusive (or well beyond) characterized by long hours, unpaid labor, and no future. With no clear pathways to partnership and no means of democratic control over the everyday management of the firm, we design workers find ourselves the perpetual subjects of starchitects, bosses, project managers, and the petty bourgeois. 

As such, the work we do is confined to the narrow horizon of ruling class values, often defined short-term profit incentives and by a world decades past which no longer exists. As such, they are totally incapable of thinking their way out of the complex social, economic, and environmental problems this and future generations face. Despite purported concerns for sustainability, with its varying metrics for measuring it (e.g., the three or four "Es", pillars) or whatever other popular ideological definition it presupposes, these ideologues, their metrics, and the industries they serve have brought us no closer to the realization of a sustainable future. Instead, we are presented with an ever expanding world of overlapping problems whilst being provided with no power or position to address them. The reality of this condition suggests that such power will never be provided without pressure or a revolution in practice, instigated and guided by architectural and related-industry workers and not by the petty bourgeois managers and bourgeois partners, CEOs, and owners of the existing firms, companies, and corporations which presently determine all coordinates of architectural design practice.

## A Future through Collectivism, Equal Partnership and Unionization

The proper response to this predicament is collectivisation of firm operations to the workers, regardless of age, gender, sex, race, seniority, or licensure, to be achieved initially through unionization and collective bargaining. In a union, workers can most effectively collectively bargain, which is a right of all workers in the United States. Through collective bargaining, workers can articulate and achieve not only better pay rates, benefits, and working conditions, but also a better collective future itself defined by a truly sustainable and equitable society. Doing work for the sake of profit can transform into doing work for the sake of the planet, community, pleasure, and any number of material manifestations of the good life. At present, all pressure on the architectural disciplines is forced downward, from the powerful sources of money that drive development through the layers of hierarchies which structure architectural and construction practices. This pressure creates cultures of "efficiency," "productivity," and "innovation" for the sake of profit, built upon the surplus labor of all-nighters glued in front of a CAD or digital illustration program. Admittedly, there is joy to be found in the hard work required to bring architectural visions to life via design drawings, renderings, and construction documents—but the fetishize this grind is to endorse one's own exploitation for the benefit of an elite guard and a capitalist class who absorbs the surplus value generated by the overextension, burnout, and in some cases death, of architectural and construction workers. Many workers in construction have realized the value of unions and collective bargaining to obtain safer and more lucrative working arrangements, yet architectural designers have been generally insulated from such consciousness of their own power. Perhaps, if one is driven most by their "passion" for their chosen discipline, we should ask what characteristics define that passion and see if the work we are doing is realizing those passions or not. For example, if one is passionate about creating environmental justice, how could a union of design workers with the same passion collectively bargain to realize environmental justice? Would this not be preferable to the present circumstances typically defined by "keeping the lights on" with multi-acre suburban tract housing and parking lots? And what of those firms who manage to skirt around the less glamorous design jobs, doing work for large corporations (Microsoft, Amazon, etc.) in constructing their corporate campuses with all their privatization and securitization of public space? How might our passion for accessible public space and community provide counter to this sequestration of the literal ground on which we live into the expanding control of mega-corporations and tech giants? For another perspective, Jessica Myers's essay "Why don't architects have unions?" describes the scope of this situation and explores the possibilities.